Add concept doc for Dynamic Task Mapping (#22867)
mistercrunch/Airflow: docs/apache-airflow/concepts/dynamic-task-mapping.rst

 .. Licensed to the Apache Software Foundation (ASF) under one
    or more contributor license agreements.  See the NOTICE file
    distributed with this work for additional information
    regarding copyright ownership.  The ASF licenses this file
    to you under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the
    "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance
    with the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at

 ..   http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

 .. Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing,
    software distributed under the License is distributed on an
    "AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY
    KIND, either express or implied.  See the License for the
    specific language governing permissions and limitations
    under the License.

====================
Dynamic Task Mapping
====================

> Dynamic Task Mapping allows a way for a workflow to create a number of tasks at runtime based upon current data, rather than the DAG author having to know in advance how many tasks would be needed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Dynamic Task Mapping allows DAGs to create a varying number of tasks at runtime based upon data from upstream tasks, rather than the DAG author having to know in advance how many tasks would be needed.
```

Author: Reading this now I see both of these are very passive voice ("allows DAGs to create" -- dags don't do anything, authors do)

Reviewer: yeah i know that thought occured to me too

but sometimes being precise can get clunky ... 

can think of it as a metaphor

in a sense you could say that the dag is creating it because, it kindof is, that's the dynamic part of it... the pipeline is dynamic and it creates its own tasks, and whether it is scheduler or the "DAG"  is sort of implementation detail.  but yeah prob there's a way to make it both precise _and_ elegant 🤷

> This can be thought of as defining your tasks in a for loop, but instead of having to have the DAG file fetch the data and do that itself, the scheduler can do this based on the output of a previous task. Right before a mapped task is executed the scheduler will create *n* copies of the task, one for each input.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is similar to defining your tasks in a for loop, but instead of having the DAG file fetch the data and do that itself, the scheduler can do this based on the output of a previous task. Right before a mapped task is executed the scheduler will create *n* copies of the task, one for each input.
```

It is also possible to have a task operate on the collected output of a mapped task, commonly known as map and reduce.

Simple mapping
==============

In its simplest form you can map over a list defined directly in your DAG file using the ``expand()`` function instead of calling your task directly.

.. code-block:: python

>     from airflow import DAG

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    from datetime import datetime

    from airflow import DAG
```

    from airflow.decorators import task

>     with DAG(dag_id="simple_mapping", start_date=datetime(2022, 3, 4)):

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    with DAG(dag_id="simple_mapping", start_date=datetime(2022, 3, 4)) as dag:
```

Reviewer 3: But this variable is never used

Reviewer 2: With the way parsing works, it's required even if it isn't explicitly "used". The DAG has to be in globals.

        @task
        def add_one(x: int):
            return x + 1

        @task
        def sum_it(values):
            total = sum(values)
            print(f"Total was {total}")

        added_values = add_one.expand(x=[1, 2, 3])
        sum_it(added_values)

This will show ``Total was 9`` in the task logs when executed.

.. note:: A reduce task is not required.

    Although we show a "reduce" task here (``sum_it``) you don't have to have one, the mapped tasks will still be executed even if they have no downstream tasks.

Repeated Mapping
================

> The result of one mapped task can also be used as input to the next mapped task

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The result of one mapped task can also be used as input to the next mapped task.
```

.. code-block:: python

    from airflow import DAG
    from airflow.decorators import task

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

Let's drop these as we've already shown them in the first example.

>     with DAG(dag_id="repeated_mapping", start_date=datetime(2022, 3, 4)):

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    with DAG(dag_id="repeated_mapping", start_date=datetime(2022, 3, 4)) as dag:
```

        @task
        def add_one(x: int):
            return x + 1

        first = add_one.expand(x=[1, 2, 3])
        second = add_one.expand(x=first)

> This would have a result of [3, 4, 5]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This would have a result of ``[3, 4, 5]``.
```

Constant parameters
===================

As well as passing arguments that get expanded at run-time, it is possible to pass arguments that don't change – in order to clearly differentiate between the two kinds we use different functions, ``expand()`` for mapped arguments, and ``partial()`` for unmapped ones.

> For example:
> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

.. code-block:: python

    @task
    def add(x: int, y: int):
        return x + y

    added_values = add.partial(y=10).expand(x=[1, 2, 3])
    # This results in add function being expanded to
    # add(x=1,y=10)
    # add(x=2,y=10)
    # add(x=3,y=10)

This would result in values of 11, 12, 13.

This is also useful for passing things such as connection IDs, database table names, or bucket names to tasks.

Mapping over multiple parameters
================================

As well as a single parameter it is possible to pass multiple parameters to expand. This will have the effect of creating a "cross product", calling the mapped task with each combination of parameters.

> For example:
> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

Let's be consistent.

> As well as a single parameter it is possible to pass multiple parameters to expand. This will have the effect of creating a "cross product" effect, calling the mapped task with each combination of parameters.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As well as a single parameter it is possible to pass multiple parameters to expand. This will have the effect of creating a "cross product", calling the mapped task with each combination of parameters.
```

.. code-block:: python

    @task
    def add(x: int, y: int):
        return x + y

    added_values = add.expand(x=[2, 4, 8], y=[5, 10])
    # This results in the add function being called with
    # add(x=2, y=5)
    # add(x=2, y=10)
    # add(x=4, y=5)
    # add(x=4, y=10)
    # add(x=8, y=5)
    # add(x=8, y=10)

This would result in the add task being called 6 times. Please note however that the order of expansion is not guaranteed.

> It is not possible to achieve an effect similar to Python's zip function with mapped arguments.

Reviewer: that seems odd... is there really no way?  perhaps that's where XComArg.map comes in? cc @uranusjr

Author: We haven't written that yet :)

Task-generated Mapping
======================

> Up until now the examples we've shown could all be achieved with a ``for`` loop in the DAG file, but the real power of dynamic task mapping comes from being able to have a task generate the list to iterate over. For example:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Up until now the examples we've shown could all be achieved with a ``for`` loop in the DAG file, but the real power of dynamic task mapping comes from being able to have a task generate the list to iterate over.
```

.. code-block:: python

    @task
    def make_list():

>         # This can also be from an API call, checking a database, -- almost anything you like, as long as the

Reviewer: since it's what you advertise, maybe it makes sense to actually demo an API call here e.g. with requests.  or with a sql query.

Reviewer: also... is returning a generator permitted?

Author: No. List or Dict.

        # resulting list/dictionary can be stored in the current XCom backend.
        return [1, 2, {"a": "b"}, "str"]

    @task
    def consumer(arg):
        print(repr(arg))

    with DAG(dag_id="dynamic-map", start_date=datetime(2022, 4, 2)) as dag:
        consumer.expand(arg=make_list())

> The make_list runs as a normal task and must return a list or dict (see `What data types can be expanded?`_), and then the consumer task will be called four times, once with each value in the return of make_list.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The ``make_list`` task runs as a normal task and must return a list or dict (see `What data types can be expanded?`_), and then the ``consumer`` task will be called four times, once with each value in the return of ``make_list``.
```

Mapping with non-TaskFlow operators
===================================

> It is possible to use partial and expand with classic style operators as well. Some arguments are not mappable and must be passed to ``partial()``, such as task_id, queue, pool, and most other arguments to BaseOperator.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It is possible to use ``partial`` and ``expand`` with classic style operators as well. Some arguments are not mappable and must be passed to ``partial()``, such as ``task_id``, ``queue``, ``pool``, and most other arguments to ``BaseOperator``.
```

> It is possible to use partial and expand with classic style operators as well. Some arguments are not mappable and must be passed to ``partial()``, such as task_id, queue, pool, and most other arguments to BaseOperator. 

Author: ```suggestion
It is possible to use partial and expand with classic style operators as well. Some arguments are not mappable and must be passed to ``partial()``, such as task_id, queue, pool, and most other arguments to BaseOperator.
```

> It is possible to use partial and expand with classic style operators as well. Some arguments are not mappable, such as task_id, queue, pool, and most other arguments to BaseOperator and have to be passed to ``partial()``

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is possible to use partial and expand with classic style operators as well. Some arguments are not mappable and must be passed to ``partial()``, such as task_id, queue, pool, and most other arguments to BaseOperator. 
```

.. code-block:: python

    BashOperator.partial(task_id="bash", do_xcom_push=False).expand(
        bash_command=["echo 1", "echo 2"]
    )

Mapping over result of classic operators
----------------------------------------

> If you want to map over the result of a classic operator you will need to create an XComArg object manually:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you want to map over the result of a classic operator you will need to create an ``XComArg`` object manually.
```

.. code-block:: python

    from airflow import XComArg

    task = MyOperator(task_id="source")

>     downstream = MyOperator2.partial(task_id="consumer").expand(input=XComArg(task))

Reviewer: this example is a bit confusing.   not clear why you have to use an xcom arg or what an xcom arg is.  could the task -> xcomarg conversion not be handled in `expand`?

Author: It likely could, yes. Right now I'm just going with documenting what the current behaviour is.

    with DAG(dag_id="mapped_s3", start_date=datetime(2020, 4, 7)) as dag:
        files = S3ListOperator(
            task_id="get_input",
            bucket="example-bucket",
            prefix='incoming/provider_a/{{ data_interval_start.strftime("%Y-%m-%d") }}',
        )

        @task
        def count_lines(aws_conn_id, bucket, file):
            hook = S3Hook(aws_conn_id=aws_conn_id)

            return len(hook.read_key(file, bucket).splitlines())

        @task
        def total(lines):
            return sum(lines)

        counts = count_lines.partial(aws_conn_id="aws_default", bucket=files.bucket).expand(
            file=XComArg(files)
        )
        total(lines=counts)

What data types can be expanded?
================================

Currently it is only possible to map against a dict, a list, or one of those types stored in XCom as the result of a task.

If an upstream task returns an unmappable type, the mapped task will fail at run-time with an ``UnmappableXComTypePushed`` exception. For instance, you can't have the upstream task return a plain string – it must be a list or a dict.

Placing limits on mapped tasks
==============================

> There are two limits that you can place on a task: how many mapped task instances can be created as the result of expansion, and how many of the mapped task can run at once

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There are two limits that you can place on a task: how many mapped task instances can be created as the result of expansion, and how many of the mapped task can run at once.
```

> There are two limits that you can place on a task: how many mapped task instances can be created as the result of expansion, and how many of the mapped task can run at once

Reviewer: > how many of the mapped task can run at once

some ambiguity here

you refer to "mapped task" both as the "parent" task (elsewhere) and it seems as the actual generated task instances (here).  may be possible to clarify here you're talking about total mapped instances and not just num "parent" mapped tasks

Author: parent task should be the upstream task/source of the mapping list. Can you remember where I referred to it like that?

Reviewer: when i say "parent" i am referring to the mapped operator instance essentially.... which is itself never gonna be a task ... the tasks that get created are the instances that operato on each input.  and that's what you mean by `how many of the mapped task can run at once` no? like the instances -- not the "parent".  as to where, there are a lot of places where "mapped task" is taken to mean the parent e.g. L24 and L26.  L24 says "before a mapped task is executed the scheduler will create N copies of the task" so here you are referring to mapped task as "parent".   and same on L26 it is mapped task as parent: "collective output of a mapped task" meaning the collection of mapped _TIs_.  but when you refer "mapped task" in the line referenced above (L228) you are referring to the TIs and that's the ambiguity i'm talking about.  not big deal just a suggestion.

- **Limiting number of mapped task**

>   The [core] ``max_map_length`` config option is the maximum number of task that expand can create – the default value is 1024.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  The [core] ``max_map_length`` config option is the maximum number of tasks that ``expand`` can create – the default value is 1024.
```

>   If a source task ("make_list" in our earlier example) returns a list longer than this it will result in *that* task failing.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  If a source task (``make_list`` in our earlier example) returns a list longer than this it will result in *that* task failing.
```

- **Limiting parallel copies of a mapped task**

  If you wish to not have a large mapped task consume all available runner slots you can use the ``max_active_tis_per_dag`` setting on the task to restrict how many can be running at the same time.

  Note however that this applies to all copies of that task against all active DagRuns, not just to this one specific DagRun.

  .. code-block:: python

      @task(max_active_tis_per_dag=16)
      def add_one(x: int):
          return x + 1

      BashOperator.partial(task_id="my_task", max_active_tis_per_dag=16).expand(
          bash_command=commands
      )

Automatically skipping zero-length maps
=======================================

> If the input is empty (zero length), no new tasks will be created and the mapped Task will be marked as SKIPPED.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If the input is empty (zero length), no new tasks will be created and the mapped task will be marked as ``SKIPPED``.
```

    with DAG(dag_id="mapped_s3", start_date=datetime(2020, 4, 7)) as dag:
        files = S3ListOperator(
            task_id="get_input",
            bucket="example-bucket",
            prefix='incoming/provider_a/{{ data_interval_start.strftime("%Y-%m-%d") }}',
        )

        @task
        def count_lines(aws_conn_id, bucket, file):
            hook = S3Hook(aws_conn_id=aws_conn_id)

            return len(hook.read_key(file, bucket).splitlines())

        @task
        def total(lines):
            return sum(lines)

        counts = count_lines.partial(aws_conn_id="aws_default", bucket=files.bucket).expand(
            file=XComArg(files)
        )
        total(lines=counts)

What data types can be expanded?
================================

Currently it is only possible to map against a dict, a list, or one of those types stored in XCom as the result of a task.

If an upstream task returns an unmappable type, the mapped task will fail at run-time with an ``UnmappableXComTypePushed`` exception. For instance, you can't have the upstream task return a plain string – it must be a list or a dict.

Placing limits on mapped tasks
==============================

> There are two limits that you can place on a task: how many mapped task instances can be created as the result of expansion, and how many of the mapped task can run at once.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
There are two limits that you can place on a task: 
  #. the number of mapped task instances can be created as the result of expansion.
  #. The number of the mapped task can run at once.
```

let's use [numbering](https://sublime-and-sphinx-guide.readthedocs.io/en/latest/lists.html) for easier read.

    with DAG(dag_id="mapped_s3", start_date=datetime(2020, 4, 7)) as dag:
        files = S3ListOperator(
            task_id="get_input",
            bucket="example-bucket",
            prefix='incoming/provider_a/{{ data_interval_start.strftime("%Y-%m-%d") }}',
        )

        @task
        def count_lines(aws_conn_id, bucket, file):
            hook = S3Hook(aws_conn_id=aws_conn_id)

            return len(hook.read_key(file, bucket).splitlines())

        @task
        def total(lines):
            return sum(lines)

        counts = count_lines.partial(aws_conn_id="aws_default", bucket=files.bucket).expand(
            file=XComArg(files)
        )
        total(lines=counts)

What data types can be expanded?
================================

Currently it is only possible to map against a dict, a list, or one of those types stored in XCom as the result of a task.

If an upstream task returns an unmappable type, the mapped task will fail at run-time with an ``UnmappableXComTypePushed`` exception. For instance, you can't have the upstream task return a plain string – it must be a list or a dict.

Placing limits on mapped tasks
==============================

> There are two limits that you can place on a task: 

Author: ```suggestion
There are two limits that you can place on a task:

```

    Although we show a "reduce" task here (``sum_it``) you don't have to have one, the mapped tasks will still be executed even if they have no downstream tasks.

Repeated Mapping
================

The result of one mapped task can also be used as input to the next mapped task

.. code-block:: python

    from airflow import DAG
    from airflow.decorators import task

    with DAG(dag_id="repeated_mapping", start_date=datetime(2022, 3, 4)):

        @task
        def add_one(x: int):
            return x + 1

        first = add_one.expand(x=[1, 2, 3])
        second = add_one.expand(x=first)

This would have a result of [3, 4, 5]

Constant parameters
===================

As well as passing arguments that get expanded at run-time, it is possible to pass arguments that don't change – in order to clearly differentiate between the two kinds we use different functions, ``expand()`` for mapped arguments, and ``partial()`` for unmapped ones.

For example:

.. code-block:: python

    @task
    def add(x: int, y: int):
        return x + y

    added_values = add.partial(y=10).expand(x=[1, 2, 3])
    # This results in add function being expanded to

>     # add(x=1,y=10)
>     # add(x=2,y=10)
>     # add(x=3,y=10)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    # add(x=1, y=10)
    # add(x=2, y=10)
    # add(x=3, y=10)
```

> This would result in values of 11, 12, 13.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This would result in values of 11, 12, and 13.
```

This is also useful for passing things such as connection IDs, database table names, or bucket names to tasks.

Mapping over multiple parameters
================================

As well as a single parameter it is possible to pass multiple parameters to expand. This will have the effect of creating a "cross product", calling the mapped task with each combination of parameters.

For example:

.. code-block:: python

    @task
    def add(x: int, y: int):
        return x + y

    added_values = add.expand(x=[2, 4, 8], y=[5, 10])
    # This results in the add function being called with
    # add(x=2, y=5)
    # add(x=2, y=10)
    # add(x=4, y=5)
    # add(x=4, y=10)
    # add(x=8, y=5)
    # add(x=8, y=10)

This would result in the add task being called 6 times. Please note however that the order of expansion is not guaranteed.

> It is not possible to achieve an effect similar to Python's zip function with mapped arguments.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
It is not possible to achieve an effect similar to Python's ``zip`` function with mapped arguments.
```

Task-generated Mapping
======================

Up until now the examples we've shown could all be achieved with a ``for`` loop in the DAG file, but the real power of dynamic task mapping comes from being able to have a task generate the list to iterate over. For example:

.. code-block:: python

    @task
    def make_list():
        # This can also be from an API call, checking a database, -- almost anything you like, as long as the
        # resulting list/dictionary can be stored in the current XCom backend.
        return [1, 2, {"a": "b"}, "str"]

    @task
    def consumer(arg):
        print(repr(arg))

    with DAG(dag_id="dynamic-map", start_date=datetime(2022, 4, 2)) as dag:
        consumer.expand(arg=make_list())

> The make_list runs as a normal task and must return a list or dict (see `What data types can be expanded?`_), and then the consumer task will be called four times, once with each value in the return of make_list.

Reviewer 3: I was going to suggest _The `make_list` task_.

Reviewer 2: Yeah, that works as well.

Reviewer 2: Done.

.. code-block:: python

    from datetime import datetime

    from airflow import DAG, XComArg
    from airflow.decorators import task
    from airflow.providers.amazon.aws.hooks.s3 import S3Hook
    from airflow.providers.amazon.aws.operators.s3 import S3ListOperator

    with DAG(dag_id="mapped_s3", start_date=datetime(2020, 4, 7)) as dag:
        files = S3ListOperator(
            task_id="get_input",
            bucket="example-bucket",
            prefix='incoming/provider_a/{{ data_interval_start.strftime("%Y-%m-%d") }}',
        )

        @task
        def count_lines(aws_conn_id, bucket, file):
            hook = S3Hook(aws_conn_id=aws_conn_id)

            return len(hook.read_key(file, bucket).splitlines())

        @task
        def total(lines):
            return sum(lines)

        counts = count_lines.partial(aws_conn_id="aws_default", bucket=files.bucket).expand(
            file=XComArg(files)
        )
        total(lines=counts)

What data types can be expanded?
================================

> Currently it is only possible to map against a dict, a list, or one of those types stored in XCom as the result of a task.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Currently it is only possible to map against a dict, a list, of one of those types stored in XCom as the result of a task.
```

This seems to make more sense? Because we certainly can’t map against most types stored in XCom.

Reviewer 2: No, "or" is correct here, as it means this:

against a dict, a list, or one of those types (dict, list) stored in XCom
